Dr. Williamson, first of all, we'd like to begin with what you're working on
right now. I'm working on a novel called The Queen of the Legion. There's
another story about the Legion of Space, a series that I started back in the
early 30's.
Is it going to be serialized like the others? Well, here's hoping. The market's
sort of uncertain. Fred Pohl gave me a contract for it a couple of years ago,
and I was president of the Science Fiction Writers of America going to be
involved in other things and it has taken time to do, but it's finally falling
together and I'm putting it into my new word processor and I'm pretty
enthusiastic about it now. The main character is a girl and at first I was sort
of uncertain whether I could be convincing and presenting a woman's point of
view, but I've sort of fallen in love with Jill by now. I think I know her
pretty well and like her, and I hope the readers do. Have you finished that
trilogy with Frederick Pohl, the one on the Dyson sphere, the three volumes? No,
I'm sorry to say we haven't. I finished my part of the second volume some years
ago, I think. A year and a half ago, Judy-Lynn Del Rey gave us a revised contract
with a larger advance, and her idea then was to publish all three proposed
volumes in one thick volume. Fred was going to get it out last March at that
time, but that's the last I've heard about it. He's promoting his work. He's
involved in many projects. That's always been the history of working with him.
He's a great collaborator, but he takes his time, so I have hope that he'll
eventually get back to it. Recently you've been redoing some of the Humanoid
material too, correct? Is there a novel that's come out? Yeah, there's a new
novel called The Humanoid Touch that I finished well over a year ago, and it
will be published, I think, this summer in a limited signed edition from
Fantasia Press with a whole reinhardt hardcover this November. Part of that was
serialized in Analog. Yeah, Analog reprinted or printed the middle of it under
the title Humanoid Universe. There was a reference in that story or somewhere to
a book called 10 trillion wise machines. What's that? Well, that was my second
title, to it. First I was going to call the novel the Humanoid Universe, and
Fred didn't like that and I or wanted to call it Ten Trillion Wise Machines,
which is a title I like, but people wanted the name Humanoids in the title, and
also that's pretty long to go on a book jacket. And J.K. Kline, a science
fiction photographer, is the man who came up with the title Of Humanoid Touch,
which I think is appropriate and brief and has humanoids in it, and I'm very
happy with it. Perhaps you could explain the difference between humanoids and
androids and robots. Well, in my mind, the
robots are a mechanical man, and the humanoids are a type of robot. That is,
they're made out of plastic and steel and operated by remote control by
computers and so forth. Androids, as I used the term in the commentators many
years ago, and is generally used as a meat machine, a synthetic or artificial
human being made out of flesh and blood. The sort of thing that is possible to
produce these days or in the near future by genetic engineering, let's say. That
is, androids bleed and humanoids drip grease.
It's interesting that you're going back and doing some of the material that you
started with. Well not started with, but what you've done before—you know, the
Legion material, Humanoids, and so forth. Was it 1928 you published—you began
publishing? I mean, the first story was published in the November—December 1928
issue of Amazing. You know, I've been a science fiction writer ever since. That
was in the tradition of Merritt, wasn't it? More of a fantasy kind of? Yes,
pretty much. At that time I was infatuated with Merritt. I haven't re-read him
for many years lest the spell be gone, but the first stories I wrote, well, were
full of these attempts at purple color, illustrated with too many adjectives,
and later I began to try for more convincing settings and stronger characters
and fewer adjectives. What made you start writing? Well, I grew up on a sandhill
farm in the south part of this county when times were pretty grim. And I, well,
wanted to be some sort of scientist without any direction or means to get a
scientific education. And a few months after Gernsback started the Old Amazing,
well, I came across some copies of it. and I was immediately fascinated with
experiments that worked, with travel in time and spaceships to other worlds and
all sorts of wonderful things, and it's been an important share of my life ever
since. Did you start for the money? No, the money was, well, almost immaterial.
I got $25 for that first story eventually, And after a couple of years, I earned
enough writing science fiction so I didn't have to do anything else. But half
the secret was that I wasn't married and was willing to live economically. So I
certainly didn't do it for the money. After two years in college, I was offered
a student assistantship in the chemistry lab. I could have had a different
career as a chemist probably, only I was more fascinated with science fiction
than I was with solid science by that time, though I have tried to keep up as
best a layman can with what's going on in science. Was the account true that I
read in one place where you didn't know that your story had been accepted until
you saw the magazine? Yeah, that's true. I wrote these stories on an old
Remington basket model typewriter in a purple ribbon and two or three of them
came back. One of them was with a misspelled word in the title. And the metal
man never did come back. And I was over at Canyon, Texas walking by a newsstand
one day and I saw my metal man on the cover of Amazing. It was quite a thrill.
What was it like
to you to write for the pulp, say through the 30s and so forth? Did you feel a
part of something or did you feel isolated out here? I mean there weren't many
around here who could share your interest. Well the science fiction world has
always been a sort of special community where we I suppose we felt we had our
own special handle on science in the future and the shape of things to come.
them, and though I didn't see other science fiction people very often, I read
the stories and read letters in the magazines and so forth. In those days,
before the paperbacks, and before TV, and before the comics, when people read a
lot more for entertainment than they do nowadays, and there were really three
sorts of magazines. There were the quality magazines like Harper's and the old
Scribner's, Atlantic for people with brains, and the slicks printed on coated
paper that would take good advertising for people with money to spend, and the
pulps for people who hadn't neither brains nor money. But we had a lot of fun in
the pulps, even if we were looked down upon widely. And eventually, while
science fiction got recognized as being not entirely without brains, let's say.
And nowadays, there's a little bit of money in it, sometimes. Back then, it
wasn't called science fiction, was it? No, when I started, my first story was
printed as Scientifiction. Hugo Gernsback ran the word science and fiction
together. He invented the term science fiction in 29, I think. And at that time
you had to explain what it was, I used to say it was adventure stories with a
science background. Wasn't Gernsback, didn't he want more scientifically
oriented stories? Well he preached a gospel that science fiction was sugarcoated
science, that it was education, and he got a whole panel of experts with degrees
that were supposed to vet the science and even in science wonder stories when he
started that. But actually, I think that was as much for, well, to impress the
readers as anything else. Because he did use true science in his stories when he
could get it. But he also printed a lot of stories that were pretty wild. He, I
think always in the magazine, the adventure element was more important than the
science. I've only seen a few copies of those very early pulps. They say The
Amazing Stories. That's a pretty big size. Yeah, the size that time is nowadays.
Were there other sizes too or types? Well, Amazing was that size and Wonder
Stories when Gernsback started that. But they were also then, they were hardly
regular pulps because in the beginning they Amazing was filled up with reprints
of classic science fiction. And the rates were so low that professional writers
didn't write for them. So when they wrote news stories, they were mostly written
by amateurs such as myself. But the pulp magazines were published in chains
with, well, sometimes 20 different magazines. there were mass economies there
because they could print the covers all in the same press run and so forth, and
they had a standard smaller size. When Astounding came along from Clayton, first
his astounding stories in super science, it was the pulp size. What was the
rate, or average rate, for stories in those days? Well, Gernsback paid a half a
cent a word or less, which meant, well, you'd get $25 for a short story and $0
.75 for a novelette. But Clayton paid two cents a word and up, which is one
reason maybe the Clayton magazines went bankrupt in the Great Depression, but
that meant that I could pound out 4,000 words a day for two days and earn $160,
which was a fabulous feat for a farm kid in Depression Days. That was a pretty
good income back then. It was. It was a lot of money. Did you get much reader
response? Did fans or readers ever...? Well, of course, I didn't know many
people in the locality who read science fiction, but in those days the books of
the magazines were filled up with letters and tiny type from readers, the
editors and that was the principal reader response. I think the editors favored
them because they didn't have to pay for the letters and they were, well,
interesting to us and I used to write them myself as well as read them. It was
the beginning of fandom, I suppose.
For the—from what I can gather, reading back on your publishing history and so
forth, — Through the 30s, you know, late 20s, early 30s, you were mostly
writing, I guess I would call it space opera—the Legion material. I've never
objected to space opera. I still think it's wonderful, and I even think that
Star Wars could have been made out of my Legion stories as well as it was from
something else. I enjoyed Star Wars tremendously as a sort of adolescent
daydream. And well, the pulp readers were mostly young and as naive as I was and
the space opera was a sort of symbolic escape from all sorts of things.
I'm not sure how I would phrase this a change or a deepening or a more serious
aspect to your fiction that begins in the late thirties, would I be right in
saying that to you? Probably. I was growing up and the readers were growing up.
That's something that's been going on in science fiction, at least in American
science fiction all along. I think you can draw a distinction between, let's
say, European or mainstream science fiction, on the one hand, which has always
been recognized and treated as literature, and an American science fiction,
which was looked down on. But as the readers of that grew older, some of them
started writing, some of them started editing magazines, most of them outgrew
science fiction, but some of them didn't. So there was a continual increase in
the education, the sophistication and so forth of the whole field. Maybe you
used to call it a diversification because there's still a readership for Edgar
Rice Burroughs and Robert E. Howard and whatever. There are also people who,
let's say, former fans who are now academic fans who are teaching science
fiction courses and writing scholarly articles on science fiction to meet the
publisher Paris test and so forth. So that essentially the field is just
diversified into all sorts of levels and areas of interest. Did Campbell
influence the way you wrote fiction at all? Well, yes. I think he influenced the
way nearly everybody wrote science fiction because when he became an editor of
Amazing, and later changed—I mean Astounding, and later changed the name analog.
He had the best highest paying market in the field. He was, well I'd say science
fiction was serious to him as a way of speculating about science and its impact
and the future of mankind and so forth. He was tremendously inventive, he was
full of ideas that he shared very freely, and everybody who was writing science
fiction for those years, was influenced by Campbell, it seems to me, whether
directly or not. If they weren't trying to write for him and reading his letters
they were reading such writers as Heinlein and De Camp and Sturgeon and a dozen
others, who were Campbell writers. And some people resetted Campbell and felt that it
was an effort to write for him. Heinlein used to complain that you couldn't sell
him adult sex, but Campbell and I thought so much alike so that I always felt at
home with his magazine and enjoyed working with him. and he gave me occasional,
very useful suggestions that I used, and he never did edit my material heavily
or try to persuade me to say anything I didn't want to say. I believe that
personally he was optimistic about science and the future, but when I wrote such
a pessimistic, dystopian thing as with folded hands, why he published it as it
was, and asked for more. I was going to ask you about that with folded hands.
You sold that one to Campbell, that was sold to him? And he suggested a sequel
to it. He was fanatic for various things that look sort of crackpot nowadays,
including Joseph Ryan and parapsychology. And he suggested if people's hands
were folded, they would use their minds, they would develop parapsychological
powers, and perhaps defeat the humanoids. I felt that the humanoids couldn't be
defeated so that the ending of my novel was sort of ambiguous, but he published
it as I sent it to him and the readers seemed to like it well enough. I was
interested in what you wrote in the afterward to one of the recent editions of
The Humanoids, the way your interpretation of it's changed. Didn't you used to
see yourself, you said, as a romantic and the humanoids were bad, but then you'd
alter them? Well, I think so. That is, at one level, since the humanages are
machines, the perfect machine, as I originally stated the theme, the perfect
machine would be perfectly dreadful because it would take away all human freedom
and responsibility and opportunity for achievement. but as I came to look at the
story more, it seemed to me the essential human conflict in it is the conflict
between the individual and society. And the people in the stories are in a,
let's say, a complex and painful emotional situation because the humanoids are
meant to be good. they're presented as benign, they're trying to assure the
safety and happiness of mankind, and in doing this they destroy freedom. And I
decided eventually that this reflects my own very early childhood experience
when people were overprotecting me because they loved me for my own good, but
still I couldn't help a deep resentment because they wouldn't let me do so many
things I wanted to do. And I feel, by the way, that the conflict between the
individual and society is a basic material of most literature, really. You can
approach it in all sorts of ways. At one level, why literature socializes us, it
teaches us unselfishness and patriotism and obedience and all sorts of social
virtues. and at another level why it can be critical of the influence of society
on the individual, as in Ibsen especially, he presents character after character
who's destroyed by the pressures of society or by conceding too much to society.
In that novel, The Humanoids, And, um, Ironsmith, it seemed to me represented
society or conformity and so forth. When I first read the book I kept thinking
he was going to turn into an evil character, a villain, but you never made him a
villain. He remained a, I don't know, a friendly person, a helpful person, but
simply one who was siding with the humanoids. Has your attitude toward him
changed since you got into the book? Well, I think maybe I understand him
better. When I was writing the novel, I don't think I really understood him
except that he was a fascinating enigma. That is, he was a likable guy. He
wasn't caught up in the conflict that my main character was. He got along with
the humanoids and they befriended him. And it occurred to me later that he's the
example of the person who does conform to society who accepts its limitations,
and as a result of that is enabled to live a more relaxed and richer life in
contrast to the person always in conflict with society who in the worst instance
has to destroy himself because nobody can live alone. If you were to continue
with the humanoid, you know, further than you have, the humanoid stories. Would
you ultimately have them, man being happy, under their care? Would they stop
conquering the universe? Well, I haven't planned to to do that. In fact, I was
reluctant to write any more about them till Fred Pohl offered me a contract I
couldn't refuse, but in this new novel, The Humanoid Touch, where I tried to
work out an alternative that doesn't involve the destruction of the humanoids
but does offer an alternate way of life that is an escape from. And I don't know
how readers will react, but the story, I enjoyed writing and I have hopes for
it. Well, you must have, when you finished the humanoids, it was with folded
hands, and say, when you finish with Folded Hands in that time period, you must
have gotten some response from readers or editors that it was kind of
pessimistic or dystopian because you wrote The Equalizer, didn't you, it was
sort of a counter? Well, more or less, in fact.
With Folded Hands, the humanoid stories were the first project that I undertook
after I got home from World War II. I was an Air Force's weather forecaster in
the Southwest Pacific when the bomb went off, and the atomic bomb cast a dark
mushroom cloud over all science fiction. And much science fiction was suddenly
pessimistic about the future, and thus this was the setting in which I wrote the
humanoids. And when I started to write it, I originally felt that they could be
somehow conquered or disposed of or whatever, and then as I worked with them, I
realized that logically and artistically they were invincible. So I gave up in
the middle of a novel I'd planned and wrote The Equalizer as an example of,
let's say that technology is benevolent. It can be used to make a really better
world. Then I came back to the
humanoid and re-plotted it and wrote with folded hands. I would just have one
more question on the humanoid books—humanoid material. I guess some of the
reader's—some responses I've read about it have been kind of confused or on both
sides of the question as to what you meant. And my concern would be, are you
optimistic about man and his future and his relation to machines? Can he control
them? Can he survive them? Are they going to destroy him in his nature? Well, I
think I'm optimistic. I try to be optimistic. I think that once we have
technology, we can't unhave it. we can't put the genie back in the bottle. We
have to accept it and live with it. I think that people who want to return to
the 18th century or to the Garden of Eden or whatever are simply trying to
whistle in the dark. And I think that technology can solve problems if we use it
to solve problems. So I'm more optimistic than my stories. I think that to a
considerable extent, a story should have its own independent theme, more or less
independently of what the writer thinks or believes. When I'm trying to write a
story where I like to stop after I have a reasonable start and look at it and
decide what the theme is and then rearrange it if necessary to give it the
strongest impact I can.
Would you have any questions in this area, David? Not about the humanoids. I
have one backing up a little bit. It seems that many of your stories have
anticipated scientific discoveries, such as Dark Star Station anticipated
neutron stars. How did you get the ideas about that? Well, it's hard to say
except that I've always been fascinated with sciences—well, you can put it as a
sort of mystery story of what the world is, the universe is, about its origins
and development and meaning, with effort going on in a hundred fields of science
to unravel the mystery, and I've always tried to read science magazines and
science books and keep up with what's happening and I'm concerned with, well,
what the universe is and sometimes I had speculation through my own that were
later confirmed, let's say. Um, I notice a number of stories and in some of your
novels, especially in the late early forties where you described totalitarian
kind of societies like Breakdown. Was that the story, I think, with the Square
Deal if I remember correctly, and in that area where the humans are struggling
to overcome sort of a totalitarian society? Was that in any way related to the
world situation? Well, I think so. At that time of course we were faced with
Hitler, and a little bit later with Stalin. and I think they were too many
stories at that time that placed us in a struggle with a totalitarian situation.
And of course, that is sort of an ultimate statement of the problem of the
society versus the individual. The individual being destroyed or at least his
freedom erased by a totally arbitrary society.
If I'm remembering correctly that story, Breakdown… Let's see, wasn't it the one
where boss Kelen was in control? And his son wanted to go to the stars, the
research—and the boss said stay on the earth, forget that. I took that as very
characteristic of your fiction that you have to have a goal, a challenge, you
have to keep wanting to go rather than be structured and restricted in a
society. You know, kind of something to look forward to to try for. Well, I
think we all need goals and promises and escapes and freedom and realization of
possibility and so forth. It seems to me that, well, we are caught in this
paradoxical situation between the needs of the individual and the demands of the
society and we can't live completely alone we we have to have the support and
love and so forth of other people but if society demands too much it's
destructive so there's no final answer to it it's a matter of precarious such a
set of compromises that goes on as long as we live and some people make
compromises more successfully than others. I did my dissertation on H.G. Wells,
who I think was a very successful compromiser with society, who lived a very
rich and varied life and enjoyed the love of many gifted women and so on and so
forth, in contrast with a friend of his named Gissing, George Gissing, who wanted,
who, well,
met society or tried to head on, and died young and bitter and poor and
defeated. Yeah, didn't you sort of—if I remember one place you sort of—you
didn't say this, but I got the impression Gissing was the, say, the Forester
type in The Humanoids and Wells was more the Ironsmith type? Well that fits my
own notion, certainly I don't know if I ever said it. Did you take Wells to be
pessimistic about man's future progress? Well, I did my dissertation on Wells
entitled H.G. Wells' Critic of Progress, and it seems to me that he is there
saying in several ways that progress is not all we'd like it to be, that our
universe is hostile or certainly not friendly to progress, and that we have a
barrier in the animal nature of mankind which he explores in such things as the
island of Dr Moreau and then a farther notion that progress limits itself as an
evolutionary struggle and I think Wells was a Darwinian if you stop struggling
you sink back so you never can reach an ultimate peak and stay there But on the
other hand, Wells must have had hope for something better because he spent most
of his life in a struggle to build a better society, to educate us and warn us
and shape us for a world state. And he died, I think, more or less embittered
and in despair. But still it seems to me that most of his life was lived in
hope.
I wanted to ask you a little bit too. It's fascinating to me the way science
fiction caught on and began through the 30s and so forth. And oh, around 1939 if
I remember people like Asimov and Heinlein, and I think it's pronounced Van Vogt-
Van Vogt. Van Vogt, okay. They started publishing around that time. Were you
reading these people as they started? Oh yes, they all started in Campbell's
magazine. Astounding, he was—well, I don't know whether you'd say Campbell
discovered them or they discovered him, But it was, let's say, a small group
with a great deal of, well, fellowship or fellow understanding and so forth. And
it was an exciting period in which to be alive. In 1940 I spent about a year in
Los Angeles when I spent many Saturday evenings up at Bob Hanline's home. on
Laurel Canyon in Hollywood when we had what we called the Manana Literary
Society. It was not an organization. It was just a group of friends, but we got
together and talked science fiction, and we were all reading each other's
science fiction when it was published, and the field was a lot closer knit then
than it is now because everybody could read all that anybody and everybody
published. It was a little group and we were much closer together and, by and
large, we were friends. Have you kept up, you know, personal–well, I guess as
president, AFWA and so forth? SFWA, Science Fiction Writers of America? Well, I
still have a lot of old friendships and make new friends, but we have upwards of
500 members in the organization, and nearly all of them have published at least
a few stories, and publishers,
paperback publishers, send me probably 20 or 30 free books a month, and most of
these I don't have time to read. So I have old friends that I try to keep in
touch with, keep up with, but it's impossible for anybody to be as intimately
acquainted with all the field as we all were in the 30s and 40s. But we still
have a fellowship sort of subculture that draws us together in a way that
doesn't happen to readers of mystery or westerns or whatever. And it seems to me
that basically it's a concern with science and technology and the impact on
human beings and technology and the future that we have, well, a realization
that the world is changing and a concern about what the future is going to be
like, that the laymen or the mundane, as people call them, try to forget, maybe.
Because if they see change at all, they're afraid of it. I read that when you
were younger, you were sort of anti-nuclear power. Your position on that has
changed over the years. Well, I'm certainly pro-nuclear power now. I'm not sure
that I was ever strongly against it, except that when I heard that the atom had
been split, I was sort of dismayed. I had known that it was possible. I'd
written fiction about it as early as 1930, but I saw that it was going to make
life complicated, and I wish that it hadn't happened in my time. But now since
we have nuclear power it seems to me it's the safest and most necessary
development that I can see. You talk about contrasting mining coal and nuclear
power when you mine coal while you bring out a lot of uranium and thorium along
with it when you burn it while you pollute the atmosphere with a lot more
radiation than has ever escaped from a nuclear plant. You kill people in the
mines and on the railways and so on and so forth so that not—nobody, to the best
of my knowledge, has yet been killed in a commercial nuclear accident. And when
we were developing steamboat boats on the Mississippi where we blew up people
every few days and nobody thought much about it. So it seems to me we have a
sort of exaggerated fear of nuclear hazards and unwillingness to open our eyes
and balance the realities. And we can produce and use nuclear energy nowadays,
and whatever else we do is going to be... more expensive or more dangerous or
delayed or whatever. That is, space power plants, solar power or whatever offer
glittering possibilities for the next century, but they can't do much for us in
the next ten or twenty or thirty years. Change the subject for just a minute.
How did you start to collaborate with Frederick, Paul? Well at that time Fred
was my agent. and I sent him material and he suggested things that could be done
with it. The first instance was something that I called the Conquest of the
Abyss. I started out to write a novel about an undersea world and I pinned a
bedsheet on the wall. I made maps. I did research. I described the technologies
and invented people and the culture and the setup. up and when I got about
halfway through what was meant to be the novel it just died. I used up all my
creativity and planning it and when Fred came in, yeah, we got three undersea
novels about it and our reefs of space came about more or less the same way
though some what later I'd written a 400-page draft of something called the Iron
Collar man that had the reefs of space and the all the essential background in
it but I wasn't happy with it I never did do a final draft and when I showed it
to Fred why we replieded it and he rewrote it and it's was a very successful
revision speaking of anticipating science why it took a long time to get that
into print I was afraid that people wouldn't start doing organ transplants too
soon. But we did beat the heart transplanters, at least by a few years. Yeah, I
read that you're speaking of the body bank in that one. Yes, that was a lot of
fun to do and I had the body bank in my version, but Fred came up with a lot of
delightfully horrifying variations and possibilities of the body bank. Did you
ever run across that in fiction before to your knowledge or was that the first
time people had done it? Well, so far as I knew it was near the body bank was
certainly a new phrase to me. What you—I'm still curious, how—I've never
understood how someone can, say collaborate on a novel. How does that work when
you're in your relationship? Well, first of all a collaboration is a pretty
intimate relationship, sort of like a marriage. It doesn't work unless you have
a mutual trust and preferably both parties should have complementary abilities
so each one can add something. I've collaborated with several people and always
because I felt that they could do something I couldn't. The first collaboration
was with the Dr. Miles J. Brewer. Something like 50 years ago, we wrote a novel
together, as well as a short story, and a novel that I just re-read, and in some
ways I thought it was pretty good, and I kind of apprenticed myself to Brewer
who was selling to Amazing a couple of years ahead of me, and when you look at
him now he wasn't a really brilliant writer, but he was competent and serious
and took his techniques seriously, And he knew things that I wanted to learn,
and I did the writing and most of the writing. And he helped with the plotting
and suggested revisions and whatever. And with Fred, I, well, respect him. And
first of all, I like him. And then I respect his style, his editorial sense, and
his craftsmanship generally.
When I'm working with someone like Fred, I think a writer needs an audience,
that is, communication is a two-way process. You need to know your audience, you
need feedback from your audience, and when I'm doing a first drive for someone
like Fred, why, since I know him, it gives a kind of automatic focus. it helps
crystallize the point of view it makes the writing go a lot faster especially
since I know that he's going to do the final draft I don't have to worry about
literary polish the alliterations or avoiding rhyming words or whatever write
down what comes and trust him to redo it In other words, in your relationship
with him, you sort of get the ideas in the first draft and he does the revision
and polishing. That's basically it. In that book, that was a trilogy. You
mentioned the Wreaths of Space. That was a trilogy if I recall, and the third
book was Rogue Star. Right.
One of the ideas that fascinated me in that book, I think it was also in the
second book, Starchild, the concept of a sentient star and combining the
intelligence with it with a human intelligence, that … That was an idea that
appealed to me tremendously. And I'm not sure where I got it. Sturgeon wrote a
story long ago called Killdozer, about a sentient thing that seized a bulldozer.
And my original notion for the story was to begin with the creation of a mine
that could, let's say, possess matter, could store intelligence, I think, in
shifting electronic spins or whatever I had in technique. I wanted to tell the
story completely from the viewpoint of the creature that was made in the
laboratory and enlarged itself successively until it became the mind of a star.
And I did the first draft of the story that way. But Fred didn't like it, felt
that it wasn't successful, and so he had me do some more material from the
viewpoints of the human characters and the stories it published had shifting
points of view. And that's one collaboration that I've always a little bit
regretted because I felt that the way I wanted to do it from the viewpoint of
the alien could have been done and would have been something more original and
difficult, though maybe harder to do. But it worked out very well as a
collaboration, and evidently there was something less than successful about my
first draft if Fred wouldn't have wanted to change it. Do you have any questions
right now, Dan? No, I'm fascinated so far.
Every once in a while I see portions of your stories, your novels that are being
serialized in books like Galaxy, or Amazing, or Analog, and so forth. And
there's one I've read partially, but I haven't found the rest of it. The one on
Black Lantern and Snowfire. That was published as— Was that a novel? The Power
of Blackness, it was three, five novelettes put together. Three of them ran in
the magazine of fantasy and science fiction and I guess one in Galaxy and one in
Amazing. One thing I saw, I wasn't—it seemed to me, especially as a teacher of
English, I guess I look for symbolism in some places that Black Lantern seemed
to me to represent, the third world, the oppressed, the Africans, the Latin
Americans, a black man from the streets. Well, I think so. My original notion in
the story was to write a thought—a sort of thought experiment—a set up a story
situation that would be a test of primitivism versus progress. You know, the
theme of primitivism is something that we as teachers of literature your delight
to discover in William Faulkner or whatever. And what I did in the story was to
set up the planet Nggongga, which was settled many thousand years ago by
refugees from a wrecked spaceship who fell back into savagery on a hard world so
that they developed a very primitive society. Meanwhile, the galactic
civilization continued to evolve so that when Nggongga is rediscovered, we have
an ultimately sophisticated technology in contrast with a more or less ultimate
primitivism. Black Lantern is presented as a member of the primitive society in
conflict with the other society. At that time, I was still teaching school, so I
did the thing as a series of novelettes. So, it's just a way of getting it
written and published. And it probably lacks unity, and I feel myself that the
middle section of it is probably better than the two concluding sections. Did
you mean for one of the characters in that story, I think his name was
Toolsmith, did you mean for him to be the same as Ironsmith because he does
speak for the computer, the machine? Well, more or less. I wonder, especially
the similarity of name and the way they thought. Well, he's certainly a
representative of the technological culture. Would snow fire have any, I guess I
want to say symbolic value although that's not quite the word. Well, I wanted a
romance, a love interest and she appealed to me as a sophisticated, a civilized
person in contact with a savage on his way up and I felt there would be
electricity between them. The name probably is not too successful. I thought it
was sort of striking or appealing at the time but people have sneered at it. You
didn't mean for black and snow, black lanterns? Well, yes, that was part of it,
but it's maybe too obvious, let's say.